ONE 



April 9, 1995 
The Oregon Coast 

If I have learned anything in this long life of mine, it is this: In love we find out who we want to be; in 
war we find out who we are. Today’s young people want to know everything about everyone. They 
think talking about a problem will solve it. I come from a quieter generation. We understand the value 
of forgetting, the lure of reinvention. 

Lately, though, I find myself thinking about the war and my past, about the people I lost. 

Lost. 

It makes it sound as if I misplaced my loved ones; perhaps I left them where they don’t belong and 
then turned away, too confused to retrace my steps. 

They are not lost. Nor are they in a better place. They are gone. As I approach the end of my years, I 
know that grief, like regret, settles into our DNA and remains forever a part of us. 

I have aged in the months since my husband’s death and my diagnosis. My skin has the crinkled 
appearance of wax paper that someone has tried to flatten and reuse. My eyes fail me often — in the 
darkness, when headlights flash, when rain falls. It is unnerving, this new unreliability in my vision. 
Perhaps that’s why I find myself looking backward. The past has a clarity I can no longer see in the 
present. 

I want to imagine there will be peace when I am gone, that I will see all of the people I have loved 
and lost. At least that I will be forgiven. 

I know better, though, don’t I? 



* * * 

My house, named The Peaks by the lum 1 baron who built it more than a hundred years ago, is for 
sale, and I am preparing to move because my son thinks I should. 

He is trying to take care of me, to show how much he loves me in this most difficult of times, and so 
I put up with his controlling ways. What do I care where I die? That is the point, really. It no longer 
matters where I live. I am boxing up the Oregon beachside life I settled into nearly fifty years ago. 
There is not much I want to take with me. But there is one thing. 

I reach for the hanging handle that controls the attic steps. The stairs unfold from the ceiling like a 
gentleman extending his hand. 

The flimsy stairs wobble beneath my feet as I climb into the attic, which smells of must and mold. A 



single, hanging lightbulb swings overhead. I pull the cord. 

It is like being in the hold of an old steamship. Wide wooden planks panel the walls; cobwebs turn 
the creases silver and hang in skeins from the indentations between the planks. The ceiling is so steeply 
pitched that I can stand upright omy in the center of the room. 

I see the rocking chair I used when my grandchildren were young, then an old crib and a ratty- 
looking rocking horse set on rusty springs, and the chair my daughter was refinishing when she got sick. 
Boxes are tucked along the wall, marked “Xmas,” “Thanksgiving,” “Easter,” “Halloween,” 
“Serveware,” “Sports.” In those boxes are the things I don’t use much anymore but can’t bear to part 
with. For me, admitting that I won’t decorate a tree for Christmas is giving up, and I’ve never been good 
at letting go. Tucked in the corner is what I am looking for: an ancient steamer trunk covered in travel 
stickers. 

With effort, I drag the heavy trunk to the center of the attic, directly beneath the hanging light. I 
kneel beside it, but the pain in my knees is piercing, so I slide onto my backside. 

For the first time in thirty years, I lift the tmnk’s lid. The top tray is full of baby memorabilia. Tiny 
shoes, ceramic hand molds, crayon drawings populated by stick figures and smiling suns, report cards, 
dance recital pictures. 

I lift the tray from the trunk and set it aside. 

The mementos in the bottom of the trunk are in a messy pile: several faded leather-bound journals; a 
packet of aged postcards tied together with a blue satin ribbon; a cardboard box bent in one corner; a set 
of slim books of poetry by Julien Rossignol; and a shoebox that holds hundreds of black-and-white 
photographs. 

On top is a yellowed, faded piece of paper. 

My hands are shaking as I pick it up. It is a carte d’identite, an identity card, from the war. I see the 
small, passport-sized photo of a young woman. Juliette Gervaise. 

“Mom?” 

I hear my son on the creaking wooden steps, footsteps that match my heartbeats. Has he called out 
to me before? 

“Mom? You shouldn’t be up here. Shit. The steps are unsteady.” He comes to stand beside me. “One 
fall and — ” 

I touch his pant leg, shake my head softly. I can’t look up. “Don’t” is all I can say. 

He kneels, then sits. I can smell his aftershave, something subtle and spicy, and also a hint of smoke. 
He has sneaked a cigarette outside, a habit he gave up decades ago and took up again at my recent 
diagnosis. There is no reason to voice my disapproval: He is a doctor. He knows better. 

My instinct is to toss the card into the trunk and slam the lid down, hiding it again. It’s what I have 
done all my life. 

Now I am dying. Not quickly, perhaps, but not slowly, either, and I feel compelled to look back on 
my life. 

“Mom, you’re crying.” 



“Am I?” 

I want to tell him the truth, but I can’t. It embarrasses and shames me, this failure. At my age, I 
should not be afraid of anything — certainly not my own past. 

I say only, “I want to take this trunk.” 

“It’s too big. I’ll repack the things you want into a smaller box.” 

I smile at his attempt to control me. “I love you and I am sick again. For these reasons, I have let 
you push me around, but I am not dead yet. I want this trunk with me.” 

“What can you possibly need in it? It’s just our artwork and other junk.” 

If I had told him the truth long ago, or had danced and drunk and sung more, maybe he would have 
seen me instead of a dependable, ordinary mother. He loves a version of me that is incomplete. I always 
thought it was what I wanted: to be loved and admired. Now I think perhaps I’d like to be known. 

“Think of this as my last request.” 

I can see that he wants to tell me not to talk that way, but he’s afraid his voice will catch. He clears 
his throat. “You’ve beaten it twice before. You’ll beat it again.” 

We both know this isn’t true. I am unsteady and weak. I can neither sleep nor eat without the help of 
medical science. “Of course I will.” 

“I just want to keep you safe.” 

I smile. Americans can be so naive. 

Once I shared his optimism. I thought the world was safe. But that was a long time ago. 

“Who is Juliette Gervaise?” Julien says and it shocks me a little to hear that name from him. 

I close my eyes and in the darkness that smells of mildew and bygone lives, my mind casts back, a 
line thrown across years and continents. Against my will — or maybe in tand^ with it, who knows 
anymore? — I remember. 



TWO 



The lights are going out all over Europe; 

We shall not see them lit again in our lifetime. 
— Sir Edward Grey, on World War I 



August 1939 
France 

Vianne Mauriac left the cool, stucco-walled kitchen and stepped out into her front yard. On this 
beautiful summer morning in the Loire Valley, everything was in bloom. White sheets flapped in the 
breeze and roses tumbled like laughter along the ancient stone wall that hid her property from the road. 
A pair of industrious bees buzzed among the blooms; from far away, she heard the chugging purr of a 
train and then the sweet sound of a little girl’s laughter. 

Sophie. 

Vianne smiled. Her eight-year-old daughter was probably running through the house, making her 
father dance attendance on her as they readied for their Saturday picnic. 

“Your daughter is a tyre =]” Antoine said, appearing in the doorway. 

He walked toward her, his pomaded hair glinting black in the sunlight. He’d been working on his 
furniture this morning — sanding a chair that was already as soft as satin — and a fine layer of wood dust 
peppered his face and shoulders. He was a big man, tall and broad shouldered, with a rough face and a 
dark stubble that took constant effort to keep from becoming a beard. 

He slipped an arm around her and pulled her close. “I love you, V.” 

“I love you, too.” 

It was the truest fact of her world. She loved everything about this man, his smile, the way he 
mumbled in his sleep and laughed after a sneeze and sang opera in the shower. 

She’d fallen in love with him fifteen years ago, on the school play yard, before she’d even known 
what love was. He was her first everything — first kiss, first love, first lover. Before him, she’d been a 
skinny, awkward, anxious girl given to stuttering when she got scared, which was often. 

A motherless girl. 

You will be the adult now, her father had said to Vianne as they walked up to this very house for the 
first time. She’d been fourteen years old, her eyes swollen from crying, her grief unbearable. In an 
instant, this house had gone from being the family’s summer house to a prison of sorts. Maman had 
been dead less than two weeks when Papa gave up on being a father. Upon their arrival here, he’d not 



held her hand or rested a hand on her shoulder or even offered her a handkerchief to dry her tears. 

B-but I’m just a girl, she’d said. 

Not anymore. 

She’d looked down at her younger sister, Isabelle, who still sucked her thumb at four and had no 
idea what was going on. Isabelle kept asking when Maman was coming home. 

When the door opened, a tall, thin woman with a nose like a water spigot and eyes as small and dark 
as raisins appeared. 

These are the girls? the woman had said. 

Papa nodded. 

They will be no trouble. 

It had happened so fast. Vianne hadn’t really understood. Papa dropped off his daughters like soiled 
laundry and left them with a stranger. The girls were so far apart in age it was as if they were from 
different families. Vianne had wanted to comfort Isabelle — meant to — but Vianne had been in so much 
pain it was impossible to think of anyone else, especially a child as willful and impatient and loud as 
Isabelle. Vianne still remembered those first days here: Isabelle shrieking and Madame spanking her. 
Vianne had pleaded with her sister, saying, again and again, Mon Dieu, Isabelle, quit screeching. Just do 
as she bids, but even at four, Isabelle had been unmanageable. 

Vianne had been undone by all of it — the grief for her dead mother, the pain of her father’s 
abandonment, the sudden change in their circumstances, and Isabelle’s cloying, needy loneliness. 

It was Antoine who’d saved Vianne. That first summer after Maman’s death, the two of them had 
become inseparable. With him, Vianne had found an escape. By the time she was sixteen, she was 
pregnant; at seventeen, she was married and the mistress of Le Jardin. Two months later, she had a 
miscarriage and she lost herself for a while. There was no other way to put it. She’d crawled into her 
grief and cocooned it around her, unable to care about anyone or anything — certainly not a needy, 
wailing four-year-old sister. 

But that was old news. Not the sort of memory she wanted on a beautiful day like today. 

She leaned against her husband as their daughter ran up to them, announcing, “I’m ready. Let’s go.” 

“Well,” Antoine said, grinning. “The princess is ready and so we must move.” 

Vianne smiled as she went back into the house and retrieved her hat from the hook by the door. A 
strawberry blonde, with porcelain-thin skin and sea-blue eyes, she always protected herself from the 
sun. By the time she’d settled the wide-brimmed straw hat in place and collected her lacy gloves and 
picnic basket, Sophie and Antoine were already outside the gate. 

Vianne joined them on the dirt road in front of their home. It was barely wide enough for an 
automobile. Beyond it stretched acres of hayfields, the green here and there studded with red poppies 
and blue cornflowers. Forests grew in patches. In this corner of the Loire Valley, fields were more likely 
to be growing hay than grapes. Although less than two hours from Paris by train, it felt like a different 
world altogether. Few tourists visited, even in the summer. 

Now and then an automobile rumbled past, or a bicyclist, or an ox-driven cart, but for the most part, 




they were alone on the road. They lived nearly a mile from Carriveau, a town of less than a thousand 
souls that was known mostly as a stopping point on the pilgrimage of Ste. Jeanne d’Arc. There was no 
industry in town and few jobs — except for those at the airfield that was the pride of Carriveau. The only 
one of its kind for miles. 

In town, narrow cobblestoned streets wound through ancient limestone buildings that leaned 
clumsily against one another. Mortar crumbled from stone walls, ivy hid the decay that lay beneath, 
unseen but always felt. The village had been cobbled together piecemeal — crooked streets, uneven 
steps, blind alleys — over hundreds of years. Colors enlivened the stone buildings: red awnings ribbed in 
black metal, ironwork balconies decorated with geraniums in terra-cotta planters. Everywhere there was 
something to tempt the eye: a display case of pastel macarons, rough willow baskets filled with cheese 
and ham and saucisson, crates of colorful tomatoes and aubergines and cucumbers. The cafes were full 
on this sunny day. Men sat around metal tables, drinking coffee and smoking hand-rolled brown 
cigarettes and arguing loudly. 

A typical day in Carriveau. Monsieur LaChoa was sweeping the street in front of his saladerie, and 
Madame Clonet was washing the window of her hat shop, and a pack of adolescent boys was strolling 
through town, shoulder to shoulder, kicking bits of trash and passing a cigarette back and forth. 

At the end of town, they turned toward the river. At a flat, grassy spot along the shore, Vianne set 
down her basket and spread out a blanket in the shade of a chestnut tree. From the picnic basket, she 
withdrew a crusty baguette, a wedge of rich, double-cream cheese, two apples, some slices of paper-thin 
Bayonne ham, and a bottle of Bollinger ’36. She poured her husband a glass of champagne and sat 
down beside him as Sophie ran toward the riverbank. 

The day passed in a haze of sunshine-warmed contentment. They talked and laughed and shared 
their picnic. It wasn’t until late in the day, when Sophie was off with her fishing pole and Antoine was 
making their daughter a crown of daisies, that he said, “Hitler will suck us all into his war soon.” 

War. 

It was all anyone could talk about these days, and Vianne didn’t want to hear it. Especially not on 
this lovely summer day. 

She tented a hand across her eyes and stared at her daughter. Beyond the river, the green Loire 
Valley lay cultivated with care and precision. There were no fences, no boundaries, just miles of rolling 
green fields and patches of trees and the occasional stone house or barn. Tiny white blossoms floated 
like bits of cotton in the air. 

She got to her feet and clapped her hands. “Come, Sophie. It’s time to go home.” 

“You can’t ignore this, Vianne.” 

“Should I look for trouble? Why? You are here to protect us.” 

Smiling (too brightly, perhaps), she packed up the picnic and gathered her family and led them back 
to the dirt road. 

In less than thirty minutes, they were at the sturdy wooden gate of Le Jardin, the stone country 
house that had been in her family for three hundred years. Aged to a dozen shades of gray, it was a two- 




story house with blue-shuttered windows that overlooked the orchard. Ivy climbed up the two chimneys 
and covered the bricks beneath. Only seven acres of the original parcel were left. The other two hundred 
had been sold off over the course of two centuries as her family’s fortune dwindled. Seven acres was 
plenty for Vianne. She couldn’t imagine needing more. 

Vianne closed the door behind them. In the kitchen, copper and cast-iron pots and pans hung from 
an iron rack above the stove. Lavender and rosemary and thyme hung in drying bunches from the 
exposed timber beams of the ceiling. A copper sink, green with age, was big enough to bathe a small 
dog in. 

The plaster on the interior walls was peeling here and there to reveal paint from years gone by. The 
living room was an eclectic mix of furniture and fabrics — tapestried settee, Aubusson rugs, antique 
Chinese porcelain, chintz and toile. Some of the paintings on the wall were excellent — perhaps 
important — and some were amateurish. It had the jumbled, cobbled-together look of lost money and 
bygone taste — a little shabby, but comfortable. 

She paused in the salon, glancing through the glass-paned doors that led to the backyard, where 
Antoine was pushing Sophie on the swing he’d made for her. 

Vianne hung her hat gently on the hook by the door and retrieved her apron, tying it in place. While 
Sophie and Antoine played outside, Vianne cooked supper. She wrapped a pink pork tenderloin in thick- 
cut bacon, tied it in twine, and browned it in hot oil. While the pork roasted in the oven, she made the 
rest of the meal. At eight o’clock — right on time — she called everyone to supper and couldn’t help 
smiling at the thundering of feet and the chatter of conversation and the squealing of chair legs scraping 
across the floor as they sat down. 

Sophie sat at the head of the table, wearing the crown of daisies Antoine had made for her at the 
riverbank. 

Vianne set down the platter. A delicious fragrance wafted upward — roasted pork and crispy bacon 
and apples glazed in a rich wine sauce, resting on a bed of browned potatoes. Beside it was a bowl of 
fresh peas, swimming in butter seasoned with tarragon from the garden. And of course there was the 
baguette Vianne had made yesterday morning. 

As always, Sophie talked all through supper. She was like her Tante Isabelle in that way — a girl who 
couldn’t hold her tongue. 

When at last they came to dessert — He flottante, islands of toasted meringue floating in a rich creme 
anglaise — there was a satisfied silence around the table. 

“Well,” Vianne said at last, pushing her half-empty dessert plate away, “it’s time to do the dishes.” 

“Ahh, Maman,” Sophie whined. 

“No whining,” Antoine said. “Not at your age.” 

Vianne and Sophie went into the kitchen, as they did each night, to their stations — Vianne at the 
deep copper sink, Sophie at the stone counter — and began washing and drying the dishes. Vianne could 
smell the sweet, sharp scent of Antoine’s after-supper cigarette wafting through the house. 

“Papa didn’t laugh at a single one of my stories today,” Sophie said as Vianne placed the dishes back 




in the rough wooden rack that hung on the wall. “Something is wrong with him.” 

“No laughter? Well, certainly that is cause for alarm.” 

“He’s worried about the war.” 

The war. Again. 

Vianne shooed her daughter out of the kitchen. Upstairs, in Sophie’s bedroom, Vianne sat on the 
double bed, listening to her daughter chatter as she put on her pajamas and brushed her teeth and got 
into bed. 

Vianne leaned down to kiss her good night. 

“I’m scared,” Sophie said. “Is war coming?” 

“Don’t be afraid,” Vianne said. “Papa will protect us.” But even as she said it, she remembered 
another time, when her maman had said to her, Don ’t be afraid. 

It was when her own father had gone off to war. 

Sophie looked unconvinced. “But — ” 

“But nothing. There is nothing to worry about. Now go to sleep.” 

She kissed her daughter again, letting her lips linger on the little girl’s cheek. 

Vianne went down the stairs and headed for the backyard. Outside, the night was sultry; the air 
smelled of jasmine. She found Antoine sitting in one of the iron cafe chairs out on the grass, his legs 
stretched out, his body slumped uncomfortably to one side. 

She came up beside him, put a hand on his shoulder. He exhaled smoke and took another long drag 
on the cigarette. Then he looked up at her. In the moonlight, his face appeared pale and shadowed. 
Almost unfamiliar. He reached into the pocket of his vest and pulled out a piece of paper. “I have been 
mobilized, Vianne. Along with most men between eighteen and thirty-five.” 

“Mobilized? But ... we are not at war. I don’t — ” 

“I am to report for duty on Tuesday.” 

“But ... but ... you’re a postman.” 

He held her gaze and suddenly she couldn’t breathe. “I am a soldier now, it seems.” 




THREE 



Vianne knew something of war. Not its clash and clatter and smoke and blood, perhaps, but the 
aftermath. Though she had been born in peacetime, her earliest memories were of the war. She 
remembered watching her maman cry as she said good-bye to Papa. She remembered being hungry and 
always being cold. But most of all, she remembered how different her father was when he came home, 
how he limped and sighed and was silent. That was when he began drinking and keeping to himself and 
ignoring his family. After that, she remembered doors slamming shut, arguments erupting and 
disappearing into clumsy silences, and her parents sleeping in different rooms. 

The father who went off to war was not the one who came home. She had tried to be loved by him; 
more important, she had tried to keep loving him, but in the end, one was as impossible as the other. In 
the years since he’d shipped her off to Carriveau, Vianne had made her own life. She sent her father 
Christmas and birthday cards, but she’d never received one in return, and they rarely spoke. What was 
there left to say? Unlike Isabelle, who seemed incapable of letting go, Vianne understood — and 
accepted — that when Maman had died, their family had been irreparably broken. He was a man who 
simply refused to be a father to his children. 

“I know how war scares you,” Antoine said. 

“The Maginot Line will hold,” she said, trying to sound convincing. “You’ll be home by Christmas.” 
The Maginot Line was miles and miles of concrete walls and obstacles and weapons that had been 
constructed along the German border after the Great War to protect France. The Germans couldn’t 
breach it. 

Antoine took her in his arms. The scent of jasmine was intoxicating, and she knew suddenly, 
certainly, that from now on, whenever she smelled jasmine, she would remember this good-bye. 

“I love you, Antoine Mauriac, and I expect you to come home to me.” 

Later, she couldn’t remember them moving into the house, climbing the stairs, lying down in bed, 
undressing each other. She remembered only being naked in his arms, lying beneath him as he made 
love to her in a way he never had before, with frantic, searching kisses and hands that seemed to want to 
tear her apart even as they held her together. 

“You’re stronger than you think you are, V,” he said afterward, when they lay quietly in each other’s 



arms. 



“I’m not,” she whispered too quietly for him to hear. 



* * * 

The next morning, Vianne wanted to keep Antoine in bed all day, maybe even convince him that they 
should pack their bags and run like thieves in the night. 

But where would they go? War hung over all of Europe. 

By the time she finished making breakfast and doing the dishes, a headache throbbed at the base of 
her skull. 

“You seem sad, Maman,” Sophie said. 

“How can I be sad on a gorgeous summer’s day when we are going to visit our best friends?” 
Vianne smiled a bit too brightly. 

It wasn’t until she was out the front door and standing beneath one of the apple trees in the front 
yard that she realized she was barefoot. 

“Maman,” Sophie said impatiently. 

“I’m coming,” she said, as she followed Sophie through the front yard, past the old dovecote (now a 
gardening shed) and the empty barn. Sophie opened the back gate and ran into the well-tended 
neighboring yard, toward a small stone cottage with blue shutters. 

Sophie knocked once, got no answer, and went inside. 

“Sophie!” Vianne said sharply, but her admonishment fell on deaf ears. Manners were unnecessary 
at one’s best friend’s house, and Rachel de Champlain had been Vianne ’s best friend for fifteen years. 
They’d met only a month after Papa had so ignominiously dropped his children off at Le Jardin. 

They’d been a pair back then: Vianne, slight and pale and nervous, and Rachel, as tall as the boys, 
with eyebrows that grew faster than a lie and a voice like a foghorn. Outsiders, both of them, until they 
met. They’d become inseparable in school and stayed friends in all the years since. They’d gone to 
university together and both had become schoolteachers. They’d even been pregnant at the same time. 
Now they taught in side-by-side classrooms at the local school. 

Rachel appeared in the open doorway, holding her newborn son, Ariel. 

A look passed between the women. In it was everything they felt and feared. 

Vianne followed her friend into a small, brightly lit interior that was as neat as a pin. A vase full of 
wildflowers graced the rough wooden trestle table flanked by mismatched chairs. In the corner of the 
dining room was a leather valise, and sitting on top of it was the brown felt fedora that Rachel’s 
husband, Marc, favored. Rachel went into the kitchen for a small crockery plate full of caneles. Then 
the women headed outside. 

In the small backyard, roses grew along a privet hedge. A table and four chairs sat unevenly on a 
stone patio. Antique lanterns hung from the branches of a chestnut tree. 

Vianne picked up a canele and took a bite, savoring the vanilla-rich cream center and crispy, slightly 
burned-tasting exterior. She sat down. 

Rachel sat down across from her, with the baby asleep in her arms. Silence seemed to expand 



between them and fill with their fears and misgivings. 

“I wonder if he’ll know his father,” Rachel said as she looked down at her baby. 

“They’ll be changed,” Vianne said, remembering. Her father had been in the Battle of the Somme, in 
which more than three-quarters of a million men had lost their lives. Rumors of German atrocities had 
come home with the few who survived. 

Rachel moved the infant to her shoulder, patted his back soothingly. “Marc is no good at changing 
diapers. And Ari loves to sleep in our bed. I guess that’ll be all right now.” 

Vianne felt a smile start. It was a little thing, this joke, but it helped. “Antoine’s snoring is a pain in 
the backside. I should get some good sleep.” 

“And we can have poached eggs for supper.” 

“Only half the laundry,” she said, but then her voice broke. “I’m not strong enough for this, Rachel.” 
“Of course you are. We’ll get through it together.” 

“Before I met Antoine...” 

Rachel waved a hand dismissively. “I know. I know. You were as skinny as a branch, you stuttered 
when you got nervous, and you were allergic to everything. I know. I was there. But that’s all over now. 
You’ll be strong. You know why?” 

“Why?” 

Rachel’s smile faded. “I know I’m big — statuesque, as they like to say when they’re selling me 
brassieres and stockings — but I feel . . . undone by this, V. I am going to need to lean on you sometimes, 
too. Not with all my weight, of course.” 

“So we can’t both fall apart at the same time.” 

“Vbi/a,” Rachel said. “Our plan. Should we open a bottle of cognac now, or gin?” 

“It’s ten o’clock in the morning.” 

“You’re right. Of course. A French 75.” 



* * * 

On Tuesday morning when Vianne awoke, sunlight poured through the window, glazing the exposed 
timbers. 

Antoine sat in the chair by the window, a walnut rocker he’d made during Vianne’s second 
pregnancy. For years that empty rocker had mocked them. The miscarriage years, as she thought of 
them now. Desolation in a land of plenty. Three lost lives in four years; tiny thready heartbeats, blue 
hands. And then, miraculously: a baby who survived. Sophie. There were sad little ghosts caught in the 
wood grain of that chair, but there were good memories, too. 

“Maybe you should take Sophie to Paris,” he said as she sat up. “Julien would look out for you.” 

“My father has made his opinion on living with his daughters quite clear. I cannot expect a welcome 
from him.” Vianne pushed the matelasse coverlet aside and rose, putting her bare feet on the worn rug. 

“Will you be all right?” 

“Sophie and I will be fine. You’ll be home in no time anyway. The Maginot Line will hold. And 




Lord knows the Germans are no match for us.” 

“Too bad their weapons are. I took all of our money out of the bank. There are sixty-five thousand 
francs in the mattress. Use it wisely, Vianne. Along with your teaching salary, it should last you a good 
long time.” 

She felt a flutter of panic. She knew too little about their finances. Antoine handled them. 

He stood up slowly and took her in his arms. She wanted to bottle how safe she felt in this moment, 
so she could drink of it later when loneliness and fear left her parched. 

Remember this, she thought. The way the light caught in his unruly hair, the love in his brown eyes, 
the chapped lips that had kissed her only an hour ago, in the darkness. 

Through the open window behind them, she heard the slow, even clop-clop-clop of a horse moving 
up the road and the clattering of the wagon being pulled along behind. 

That would be Monsieur Quillian on his way to market with his flowers. If she were in the yard, he 
would stop and give her one and say it couldn’t match her beauty, and she would smile and say merci 
and offer him something to drink. 

Vianne pulled away reluctantly. She went over to the wooden dresser and poured tepid water from 
the blue crockery pitcher into the bowl and washed her face. In the alcove that served as their wardrobe, 
behind a pair of gold and white toile curtains, she put on her brassiere and stepped into her lace-trimmed 
drawers and garter. She smoothed the silk stockings up her legs, fastened them to her garters, and then 
slipped into a belted cotton frock with a squared yoke collar. When she closed the curtains and turned 
around, Antoine was gone. 

She retrieved her handbag and went down the hallway to Sophie’s room. Like theirs, it was small, 
with a steeply pitched, timbered ceiling, wide plank wooden floors, and a window that overlooked the 
orchard. An ironwork bed, a nightstand with a hand-me-down lamp, and a blue-painted armoire filled 
the space. Sophie’s drawings decorated the walls. 

Vianne opened the shutters and let light flood the room. 

As usual in the hot summer months, Sophie had kicked the coverlet to the floor sometime in the 
night. Her pink stuffed teddy bear, Bebe, slept against her cheek. 

Vianne picked up the bear, staring down at its matted, much petted face. Last year, Bebe had been 
forgotten on a shelf by the window as Sophie moved on to newer toys. 

Now Bebe was back. 

Vianne leaned down to kiss her daughter’s cheek. 

Sophie rolled over and blinked awake. 

“I don’t want Papa to go, Maman,” she whispered. She reached out for Bebe, practically snatched 
the bear from Vianne ’s hands. 

“I know.” Vianne sighed. “I know.” 

Vianne went to the armoire, where she picked out the sailor dress that was Sophie’s favorite. 

“Can I wear the daisy crown Papa made me?” 

The daisy “crown” lay crumpled on the nightstand, the little flowers wilted. Vianne picked it up 




gently and placed it on Sophie’s head. 

Vianne thought she was doing all right until she stepped into the living room and saw Antoine. 

“Papa?” Sophie touched the wilted daisy crown uncertainly. “Don’t go.” 

Antoine knelt down and drew Sophie into his embrace. “I have to be a soldier to keep you and 
Maman safe. But I’ll be back before you know it.” 

Vianne heard the crack in his voice. 

Sophie drew back. The daisy crown was sagging down the side of her head. “You promise you’ll 
come home?” 

Antoine looked past his daughter’s earnest face to Vianne ’s worried gaze. 

“Oui,” he said at last. 

Sophie nodded. 

The three of them were silent as they left the house. They walked hand in hand up the hillside to the 
gray wooden barn. Knee-high golden grass covered the knoll, and lilac bushes as big as hay wagons 
grew along the perimeter of the property. Three small white crosses were all that remained in this world 
to mark the babies Vianne had lost. Today, she didn’t let her gaze linger there at all. Her emotions were 
heavy enough right now; she couldn’t add the weight of those memories, too. 

Inside the barn sat their old, green Renault. When they were all in the automobile, Antoine started 
up the engine, backed out of the barn, and drove on browning ribbons of dead grass to the road. Vianne 
stared out the small, dusty window, watching the green valley pass in a blur of familiar images — red tile 
roofs, stone cottages, fields of hay and grapes, spindly-treed forests. 

All too quickly they arrived at the train station near Tours. 

The platform was filled with young men carrying suitcases and women kissing them good-bye and 
children crying. 

A generation of men were going off to war. Again. 

Don’t think about it, Vianne told herself. Don’t remember what it was like last time when the men 
limped home, faces burned, missing arms and legs ... 

Vianne clung to her husband’s hand as Antoine bought their tickets and led them onto the train. In 
the third-class carriage — stiflingly hot, people packed in like marsh reeds — she sat stiffly upright, still 
holding her husband’s hand, with her handbag on her lap. 

At their destination, a dozen or so men disembarked. Vianne and Sophie and Antoine followed the 
others down a cobblestoned street and into a charming village that looked like most small communes in 
Touraine. How was it possible that war was coming and that this quaint town with its tumbling flowers 
and crumbling walls was amassing soldiers to fight? 

Antoine tugged at her hand, got her moving again. When had she stopped? 

Up ahead a set of tall, recently erected iron gates had been bolted into stone walls. Behind them 
were rows of temporary housing. 

The gates swung open. A soldier on horseback rode out to greet the new arrivals, his leather saddle 
creaking at the horse’s steps, his face dusty and flushed from heat. He pulled on the reins and the horse 




halted, throwing its head and snorting. An aeroplane droned overhead. 

“You, men,” the soldier said. “Bring your papers to the lieutenant over there by the gate. Now. 
Move.” 

Antoine kissed Vianne with a gentleness that made her want to cry. 

“I love you,” he said against her lips. 

“I love you, too,” she said but the words that always seemed so big felt small now. What was love 
when put up against war? 

“Me, too, Papa. Me, too!” Sophie cried, flinging herself into his arms. They embraced as a family, 
one last time, until Antoine pulled back. 

“Good-bye,” he said. 

Vianne couldn’t say it in return. She watched him walk away, watched him merge into the crowd of 
laughing, talking young men, becoming indistinguishable. The big iron gates slammed shut, the clang of 
metal reverberating in the hot, dusty air, and Vianne and Sophie stood alone in the middle of the street. 




June 1940 
France 



The medieval villa dominated a deeply green, forested hillside. It looked like something in a 
confectioner’s shopwindow; a castle sculpted of caramel, with spun-sugar windows and shutters the 
color of candied apples. Far below, a deep blue lake absorbed the reflection of the clouds. Manicured 
gardens allowed the villa’s occupants — and, more important, their guests — to stroll about the grounds, 
where only acceptable topics were to be discussed. 

In the formal dining room, Isabelle Rossignol sat stiffly erect at the white-clothed table that easily 
accommodated twenty-four diners. Everything in this room was pale. Walls and floor and ceiling were 
all crafted of oyster-hued stone. The ceiling arched into a peak nearly twenty feet overhead. Sound was 
amplified in this cold room, as trapped as the occupants. 

Madame Dufour stood at the head of the table, dressed in a severe black dress that revealed the soup 
spoon-sized hollow at the base of her long neck. A single diamond brooch was her only adornment (one 
good piece, ladies, and choose it well; everything makes a statement, nothing speaks quite so loudly as 
cheapness). Her narrow face ended in a blunt chin and was framed by curls so obviously peroxided the 
desired impression of youth was quite undone. “The trick,” she was saying in a cultivated voice, clipped 
and cut, “is to be completely quiet and unremarkable in your task.” 

Each of the girls at the table wore the fitted blue woolen jacket and skirt that was the school 
uniform. It wasn’t so bad in the winter, but on this hot June afternoon, the ensemble was unbearable. 
Isabelle could feel herself beginning to sweat, and no amount of lavender in her soap could mask the 
sharp scent of her perspiration. 

She stared down at the unpeeled orange placed in the center of her Limoges china plate. Flatware 
lay in precise formation on either side of the plate. Salad fork, dinner fork, knife, spoon, butter knife, 
fish fork. It went on and on. 

“Now,” Madame Dufour said. “Pick up the correct utensils — quietly, s’// vous plait, quietly, and peel 
your orange.” 

Isabelle picked up her fork and tried to ease the sharp prongs into the heavy peel, but the orange 
rolled away from her and bumped over the gilt edge of the plate, clattering the china. 

“Merde, ” she muttered, grabbing the orange before it fell to the floor. 

“Merde ? ” Madame Dufour was beside her. 

Isabelle jumped in her seat. Mon Dieu, the woman moved like a viper in the reeds. “Pardon, 



Madame,” Isabelle said, returning the orange to its place. 

“Mademoiselle Rossignol,” Madame said. “How is it that you have graced our halls for two years 
and learned so little?” 

Isabelle again stabbed the orange with her fork. A graceless — but effective — move. Then she smiled 
up at Madame. “Generally, Madame, the failing of a student to learn is the failing of the teacher to 
teach.” 

Breaths were indrawn all down the table. 

“Ah,” Madame said. “So we are the reason you still cannot manage to eat an orange properly.” 

Isabelle tried to slice through the peel — too hard, too fast. The silver blade slipped off the puckered 
peel and clanged on the china plate. 

Madame Dufour’s hand snaked out; her fingers coiled around Isabelle’s wrist. 

All up and down the table, the girls watched. 

“Polite conversation, girls,” Madame said, smiling thinly. “No one wants a statue for a dinner 
partner.” 

On cue, the girls began speaking quietly to one another about things that did not interest Isabelle. 
Gardening, weather, fashion. Acceptable topics for women. Isabelle heard the girl next to her say 
quietly, “I am so very fond of Alen^on lace, aren’t you?” and really, it was all she could do to keep from 
screaming. 

“Mademoiselle Rossignol,” Madame said. “You will go see Madame Allard and tell her that our 
experiment has come to an end.” 

“What does that mean?” 

“She will know. Go.” 

Isabelle scooted back from the table quickly, lest Madame change her mind. 

Madame ’s face scrunched in displeasure at the loud screech the chair legs made on the stone floor. 

Isabelle smiled. “I really do not like oranges, you know.” 

“Really?” Madame said sarcastically. 

Isabelle wanted to run from this stifling room, but she was already in enough trouble, so she forced 
herself to walk slowly, her shoulders back, her chin up. At the stairs (which she could navigate with 
three books on her head if required), she glanced sideways, saw that she was alone, and rushed down. 

In the hallway below, she slowed and straightened. By the time she reached the headmistress’s 
office, she wasn’t even breathing hard. 

She knocked. 

At Madame’s flat “Come in,” Isabelle opened the door. 

Madame Allard sat behind a gilt-trimmed mahogany writing desk. Medieval tapestries hung from 
the stone walls of the room and an arched, leaded-glass window overlooked gardens so sculpted they 
were more art than nature. Even birds rarely landed here; no doubt they sensed the stifling atmosphere 
and flew on. 

Isabelle sat down — remembering an instant too late that she hadn’t been offered a seat. She popped 




back up. “Pardon, Madame.” 

“Sit down, Isabelle.” 

She did, carefully crossing her ankles as a lady should, clasping her hands together. “Madame 
Dufour asked me to tell you that the experiment is over.” 

Madame reached for one of the Murano fountain pens on her desk and picked it up, tapping it on the 
desk. “Why are you here, Isabelle?” 

“I hate oranges.” 

“Pardon?” 

“And if I were to eat an orange — which, honestly, Madame, why would I when I don’t like them — I 
would use my hands like the Americans do. Like everyone does, really. A fork and knife to eat an 
orange?” 

“I mean, why are you at the school?” 

“Oh. That. Well, the Convent of the Sacred Heart in Avignon expelled me. For nothing, I might 
add.” 

“And the Sisters of St. Francis?” 

“Ah. They had reason to expel me.” 

“And the school before that?” 

Isabelle didn’t know what to say. 

Madame put down her fountain pen. “You are almost nineteen.” 

“Old, Madame.” 

“I think it’s time for you to leave.” 

Isabelle got to her feet. “Shall I return to the orange lesson?” 

“You misunderstand. I mean you should leave the school, Isabelle. It is clear that you are not 
interested in learning what we have to teach you.” 

“How to eat an orange and when you can spread cheese and who is more important — the second son 
of a duke or a daughter who won’t inherit or an ambassador to an unimportant country? Madame, do 
you not know what is going on in the world?” 

Isabelle might have been secreted deep in the countryside, but still she knew. Even here, barricaded 
behind hedges and bludgeoned by politeness, she knew what was happening in France. At night in her 
monastic cell, while her classmates were in bed, she sat up, long into the night, listening to the BBC on 
her contraband radio. France had joined Britain in declaring war on Germany, and Hitler was on the 
move. All across France people had stockpiled food and put up blackout shades and learned to live like 
moles in the dark. 

They had prepared and worried and then . . . nothing. 

Month after month, nothing happened. 

At first all anyone could talk about was the Great War and the losses that had touched so many 
families, but as the months went on, and there was only talk of war, Isabelle heard her teachers calling it 
the drole de guerre, the phony war. The real horror was happening elsewhere in Europe; in Belgium and 




Holland and Poland. 

“Will manners not matter in war, Isabelle?” 

“They don’t matter now,” Isabelle said impulsively, wishing a moment later that she’d said nothing. 

Madame stood. “We were never the right place for you, but. . .” 

“My father would put me anywhere to be rid of me,” she said. Isabelle would rather blurt out the 
truth than hear another lie. She had learned many lessons in the parade of schools and convents that had 
housed her for more than a decade — most of all, she’d learned that she had to rely on herself. Certainly 
her father and her sister couldn’t be counted on. 

Madame looked at Isabelle. Her nose flared ever so slightly, an indication of polite but pained 
disapproval. “It is hard for a man to lose his wife.” 

“It is hard for a girl to lose her mother.” She smiled defiantly. “I lost both parents though, didn’t I? 
One died, and the other turned his back on me. I can’t say which hurt more.” 

“Mon Dieu, Isabelle, must you always speak whatever is on your mind?” 

Isabelle had heard this criticism all her life, but why should she hold her tongue? No one listened to 
her either way. 

“So you will leave today. I will telegram your father. Tomas will take you to the train.” 

“Tonight?” Isabelle blinked. “But ... Papa won’t want me.” 

“Ah. Consequences,” Madame said. “Perhaps now you will see that they should be considered.” 

* * * 

Isabelle was alone on a train again, heading toward an unknown reception. 

She stared out the dirty, mottled window at the flashing green landscape: fields of hay, red roofs, 
stone cottages, gray bridges, horses. 

Everything looked exactly as it always had and that surprised her. War was coming, and she’d 
imagined it would leave a mark on the countryside somehow, changing the grass color or killing the 
trees or scaring away the birds, but now, as she sat on this train chugging into Paris, she saw that 
everything looked completely ordinary. 

At the sprawling Gare de Lyon, the train came to a wheezing, belching stop. Isabelle reached down 
for the small valise at her feet and pulled it onto her lap. As she watched the passengers shuffle past her, 
exiting the train carriage, the question she’d avoided came back to her. 

Papa. 

She wanted to believe he would welcome her home, that finally, he would hold out his hands and 
say her name in a loving way, the way he had Before, when Maman had been the glue that held them 
together. 

She stared down at her scuffed suitcase. 

So small. 

Most of the girls in the schools she’d attended had arrived with a collection of trunks bound in 
leather straps and studded with brass tacks. They had pictures on their desks and mementos on their 




nightstands and photograph albums in their drawers. 

Isabelle had a single framed photograph of a woman she wanted to remember and couldn’t. When 
she tried, all that came to her were blurry images of people crying and the physician shaking his head 
and her mother saying something about holding tightly to her sister’s hand. 

As if that would help. Vianne had been as quick to abandon Isabelle as Papa had been. 

She realized that she was the only one left in the carriage. Clasping her suitcase in her gloved hand, 
she sidled out of the seat and exited the carriage. 

The platforms were full of people. Trains stood in shuddering rows; smoke filled the air, puffed up 
toward the high, arched ceiling. Somewhere a whistle blared. Great iron wheels began to churn. The 
platform trembled beneath her feet. 

Her father stood out, even in the crowd. 

When he spotted her, she saw the irritation that transformed his features, reshaped his expression 
into one of grim determination. 

He was a tall man, at least six foot two, but he had been bent by the Great War. Or at least that was 
what Isabelle remembered hearing once. His broad shoulders sloped downward, as if posture were too 
much to think about with all that was on his mind. His thinning hair was gray and unkempt. He had a 
broad, flattened nose, like a spatula, and lips as thin as an afterthought. On this hot summer day, he wore 
a wrinkled white shirt, with sleeves rolled up; a tie hung loosely tied around his fraying collar, and his 
corduroy pants were in need of laundering. 

She tried to look ... mature. Perhaps that was what he wanted of her. 

“Isabelle.” 

She clutched her suitcase handle in both hands. “Papa.” 

“Kicked out of another one.” 

She nodded, swallowing hard. 

“How will we find another school in these times?” 

That was her opening. “I want to live with you, Papa.” 

“With me?” He seemed irritated and surprised. But wasn’t it normal for a girl to want to live with 
her father? 

She took a step toward him. “I could work in the bookstore. I won’t get in your way.” 

She drew in a sharp breath, waiting. Sound amplified suddenly. She heard people walking, the 
platforms groaning beneath them, pigeons flapping their wings overhead, a baby crying. 

Of course, Isabelle. 

Come home. 

Her father sighed in disgust and walked away. 

“Well,” he said, looking back. “Are you coming?” 

* * * 



Isabelle lay on a blanket in the sweet-smelling grass, a book open in front of her. Somewhere nearby a 




bee buzzed at a blossom; it sounded like a tiny motorcycle amid all this quiet. It was a blisteringly hot 
day, a week after she’d come home to Paris. Well, not home. She knew her father was still plotting to be 
rid of her, but she didn’t want to think about that on such a gorgeous day, in the air that smelled of 
cherries and sweet, green grass. 

“You read too much,” Christophe said, chewing on a stalk of hay. “What is that, a romantic novel?” 

She rolled toward him, snapping the book shut. It was about Edith Cavell, a nurse in the Great War. 
A hero. “I could be a war hero, Christophe.” 

He laughed. “A girl? A hero? Absurd.” 

Isabelle got to her feet quickly, yanking up her hat and white kid gloves. 

“Don’t be mad,” he said, grinning up at her. “I’m just tired of the war talk. And it’s a fact that 
women are useless in war. Your job is to wait for our return.” 

He propped his cheek in one hand and peered up at her through the mop of blond hair that fell across 
his eyes. In his yachting-style blazer and wide-legged white pants, he looked exactly like what he was — 
a privileged university student who was unused to work of any kind. Many students his age had 
volunteered to leave university and join the army. Not Christophe. 

Isabelle hiked up the hill and through the orchard, out to the grassy knoll where his open-topped 
Panhard was parked. 

She was already behind the wheel, with the engine running, when Christophe appeared, a sheen of 
sweat on his conventionally handsome face, the empty picnic basket hanging from his arm. 

“Just throw that stuff in the back,” she said with a bright smile. 

“You’re not driving.” 

“It appears that I am. Now get in.” 

“It’s my automobile, Isabelle.” 

“Well, to be precise — and I know how important the facts are to you, Christophe — it’s your mother’s 
automobile. And I believe a woman should drive a woman’s automobile.” 

Isabelle tried not to smile when he rolled his eyes and muttered “fine” and leaned over to place the 
basket behind Isabelle’s seat. Then, moving slowly enough to make his point, he walked around the 
front of the automobile and took his place in the seat beside her. 

He had no sooner clicked the door shut than she put the automobile in gear and stomped on the gas. 
The automobile hesitated for a second, then lurched forward, spewing dust and smoke as it gathered 
speed. 

“Mon Dieu, Isabelle. Slow down!” 

She held on to her flapping straw hat with one hand and clutched the steering wheel with the other. 
She barely slowed as she passed other motorists. 

“Mon Dieu, slow down,” he said again. 

Certainly he must know that she had no intention of complying. 

“A woman can go to war these days,” Isabelle said when the Paris traffic finally forced her to slow 
down. “I could be an ambulance driver, maybe. Or I could work on breaking secret codes. Or charming 




the enemy into telling me a secret location or plan. Remember that game — ” 

“War is not a game, Isabelle.” 

“I believe I know that, Christophe. But if it does come, I can help. That’s all I’m saying.” 

On the rue de l’Amiral de Coligny, she had to slam on the brakes to avoid hitting a lorry. A convoy 
from the Comedie Fran^aise was pulling out of the Louvre museum. In fact, there were lorries 
everywhere and uniformed gendarmes directing traffic. Sandbags were piled up around several 
buildings and monuments to protect from attack — of which there had been none since France joined the 
war. 

Why were there so many French policemen out here? 

“Odd,” Isabelle mumbled, frowning. 

Christophe craned his neck to see what was going on. “They’re moving treasures out of the Louvre,” 
he said. 

Isabelle saw a break in traffic and sped up. In no time, she had pulled up in front of her father’s 
bookshop and parked. 

She waved good-bye to Christophe and ducked into the shop. It was long and narrow, lined from 
floor to ceiling with books. Over the years, her father had tried to increase his inventory by building 
freestanding bookcases. The result of his “improvements” was the creation of a labyrinth. The stacks led 
one this way and that, deeper and deeper within. At the very back were the books for tourists. Some 
stacks were well lit, some in shadows. There weren’t enough outlets to illuminate every nook and 
cranny. But her father knew every title on every shelf. 

“You’re late,” he said, looking up from his desk in the back. He was doing something with the 
printing press, probably making one of his books of poetry, which no one ever purchased. His blunt- 
tipped fingers were stained blue. “I suppose boys are more important to you than employment.” 

She slid onto the stool behind the cash register. In the week she’d lived with her father she’d made it 
a point not to argue back, although acquiescing gnawed at her. She tapped her foot impatiently. Words, 
phrases — excuses — clamored to be spoken aloud. It was hard not to tell him how she felt, but she knew 
how badly he wanted her gone, so she held her tongue. 

“Do you hear that?” he said sometime later. 

Had she fallen asleep? 

Isabelle sat up. She hadn’t heard her father approach, but he was beside her now, frowning. 

There was a strange sound in the bookshop, to be sure. Dust fell from the ceiling; the bookcases 
clattered slightly, making a sound like chattering teeth. Shadows passed in front of the leaded-glass 
display windows at the entrance. Hundreds of them. 

People? So many of them? 

Papa went to the door. Isabelle slid off her stool and followed him. As he opened the door, she saw a 
crowd running down the street, filling the sidewalks. 

“What in the world?” Papa muttered. 

Isabelle pushed past Papa, elbowed her way into the crowd. 




A man bumped into her so hard she stumbled, and he didn’t even apologize. More people rushed 
past them. 

“What is it? What’s happened?” she asked a florid, wheezing man who was trying to break free of 
the crowd. 

“The Germans are coming into Paris,” he said. “We must leave. I was in the Great War. I know. . .” 

Isabelle scoffed. “Germans in Paris? Impossible.” 

He ran away, bobbing from side to side, weaving, his hands fisting and unfisting at his sides. 

“We must get home,” Papa said, locking the bookshop door. 

“It can’t be true,” she said. 

“The worst can always be true,” Papa said grimly. “Stay close to me,” he added, moving into the 
crowd. 

Isabelle had never seen such panic. All up and down the street, lights were coming on, automobiles 
were starting, doors were slamming shut. People screamed to one another and reached out, trying to stay 
connected in the melee. 

Isabelle stayed close to her father. The pandemonium in the streets slowed them down. The Metro 
tunnels were too crowded to navigate, so they had to walk all the way. It was nearing nightfall when 
they finally made it home. At their apartment building, it took her father two tries to open the main 
door, his hands were shaking so badly. Once in, they ignored the rickety cage elevator and hurried up 
five flights of stairs to their apartment. 

“Don’t turn on the lights,” her father said harshly as he opened the door. 

Isabelle followed him into the living room and went past him to the window, where she lifted the 
blackout shade, peering out. 

From far away came a droning sound. As it grew louder, the window rattled, sounding like ice in a 
glass. 

She heard a high whistling sound only seconds before she saw the black flotilla in the sky, like birds 
flying in formation. 

Aeroplanes. 

“Bodies,” her father whispered. 

Germans. 

German aeroplanes, flying over Paris. The whistling sound increased, became like a woman’s 
scream, and then somewhere — maybe in the second arrondissement, she thought — a bomb exploded in 
a flash of eerie bright light, and something caught fire. 

The air raid siren sounded. Her father wrenched the curtains shut and led her out of the apartment 
and down the stairs. Their neighbors were all doing the same thing, carrying coats and babies and pets 
down the stairs to the lobby and then down the narrow, twisting stone stairs that led to the cellar. In the 
dark, they sat together, crowded in close. The air stank of mildew and body odor and fear — that was the 
sharpest scent of all. The bombing went on and on and on, screeching and droning, the cellar walls 
vibrating around them; dust fell from the ceiling. A baby started crying and couldn’t be soothed. 




“Shut that child up, please,” someone snapped. 

“I am trying, M’sieur. He is scared.” 

“So are we all.” 

After what felt like an eternity, silence fell. It was almost worse than the noise. What of Paris was 
left? 

By the time the all clear sounded, Isabelle felt numb. 

“Isabelle?” 

She wanted her father to reach out for her, to take her hand and comfort her, even if it was just for a 
moment, but he turned away from her and headed up the dark, twisting basement stairs. In their 
apartment, Isabelle went immediately to the window, peering past the shade to look for the Eiffel Tower. 
It was still there, rising above a wall of thick black smoke. 

“Don’t stand by the windows,” he said. 

She turned slowly. The only light in the room was from his torch, a sickly yellow thread in the dark. 
“Paris won’t fall,” she said. 

He said nothing. Frowned. She wondered if he was thinking of the Great War and what he’d seen in 
the trenches. Perhaps his injury was hurting again, aching in sympathy with the sound of falling bombs 
and hissing flames. 

“Go to bed, Isabelle.” 

“How can I possibly sleep at a time like this?” 

He sighed. “You will learn that a lot of things are possible.” 